---
title: "LinkedIn Optimizations"
categories: marketing
author: Andrei Radulescu-Banu
layout: post
---

#### LinkedIn recommendation ask template

Hi {{clientName}},

Hope you are doing well.

I have a quick favor to ask.

Would you be willing to write a brief testimonial about your experience with me so I can add it to our list of happy customers?

Nothing super long. Just a few sentences describing your experience with me.

Prospective customers don't care so much about what I say about my services, but they do care what our customers like you have to say.

All you have to do is simply write your testimonial here - <Linked recommendations link>

Would you be willing to do that?

Thanks so much, {{clientName}}

- {{yourName)}

#### Basic LinkedIn profile checklist

Basic Linkedln profile level 0 checklist:

LinkedIn photo checklist
* Does it look professional?
* Am I smiling?
* Am I dressed professionally?
* Is the background plain? (use tools like remove.bg if not)
* Is it the correct size? (400×400)

LinkedIn banner checklist
* Is the image high quality? (min 1584 x 396)
* Is the text on it clear?
* Does it include your company logo or branding?
* Does it have a clear call to action?
* Does it have a consistent color scheme?
* Does it have a strong visual hierarchy?

LinkedIn headline checklist
* Is it short and sweet?
* Does it include action words?
* Does it include a little bit of humor?
* Does it include specific keywords?

Linkedin summary checklist
* Does it clearly show your skills?
* Have I proofread it properly? (or run it through something like grammarly.com)
* Does it have a clear call to action?
* Is it neatly formatted?

Advanced LinkedIn profile checklist
* Have I added media to the Featured section?
* Have I customized my URL?
* Does my experience section show what I can do for my clients?
* Have I added in my skills?
* Have I added in enough keywords that I want to rank for in my profile?
* Am I posting content at least once a week?

Advanced LinkedIn profile level 2 checklist:
* Do my skills have endorsements?